This is a simple cartoony shader in
Blender. It works by taking incoming
light and breaking it into discrete
bands of shade across the surface. And
there are countless tutorials that show
you how to make this kind of material.
You take a diffuse shader, convert it to
RGB, then run it through a color ramp
node, set up the gradient how you want
it, then multiply it with your actual
texture you're trying to use, and
there's your tune shader. But this
particular approach has a limitation,
and I don't see a lot of people
addressing or talking about it. These
tune shaders don't react to colored
lighting. any scene with dynamic changes
in color or lighting. Now, all has to be
done and managed by hand. But this
doesn't have to be the case. You can
just as easily achieve the same cartoony
effect without having to lose the power
of lighting. And today, I'm going to
show you a better method for toune
shaders.
You see, the issue is here using the
color ramp. A color ramp takes a float
value and outputs a color. And that's
where the problem is. A float is a
one-dimensional scalar value. It's a
magnitude. [music] A color on the other
hand is vector consisting of three
separate scalar components. By plugging
an RGB into the input, the color has to
be converted into a single value. What
this means is we need a different
approach. The easiest way to go about
doing this is to replace the color ramp
node with a color curve node. The color
curve gives us a linear graph of the
color balance from the shader. If we
break this graph into steps, we can see
that the lighting also becomes broken
into distinct bands of light, giving the
same effect as the color ramp, but with
the added benefit of now being able to
use colored lights. This also has an
interesting effect in how lights now
interact. If we cycle through color on a
bright lamp, we can see how the color
channels contributes to the overall
lighting of the surface, growing and
fading as the colors change. But you
could also argue that this makes things
muddy and might not be the effect you're
looking for. What we're really trying to
do is simplify the brightness of our
colors, not so much the colors
themselves. So, what's the simplest way
to do that? Well, color can be
represented in more ways than just RGB.
It can also be represented by hue,
saturation, and value. And it works like
this. [music] Hue represents our color
spectrum, and saturation determines how
full the colors are. Value, on the other
hand, determines how bright these colors
are. Which means, if we can find a way
to control this, we can get our desired
effect. And fortunately for us, we have
a node that lets us directly manipulate
these values with the separate color
node and combine color node. With our
shader now running through this node
setup, we can change the color space to
HSV. And we can pull from the shaders
value directly. If we add a flow curve
to our value, we can start adjusting our
shadows this way. The same as we did
with our color curve. This time when
lights change color, there is no banding
effect from the individual RGB values.
It stays consistent and gives us a
simple shading effect without the
artifacting. I feel this method is a
much better alternative than what's
often shown through YouTube algorithm.
It provides a way of simplifying shadows
but not at the cost of losing the power
of lighting which I feel is very
important for setting the mood of a
composition. As a basis, there's a lot
more you can do with it to give you even
more to work with. For instance, you can
replace the diffuse shader with a
principal shader, which opens up
roughness, metallics, speculars, and
normal maps, just to say the least.
Practically [music] everything that the
principal shader has to offer, but
filtered into a tune shader. I could go
on forever about how to expand this
simple shader, but honestly, I think
I'll just leave it here for now. I hope
you found this interesting or
informative. Leave a like if you did,
and subscribe if you'd like to see more
like this. If you have any questions or
any ideas about this shader [music] and
how you could use it, be sure to leave
them in the comment section down below.
And with that, I think that's all I have
to say. See you.